Title: Yorkshire CHECC Date: 2017-11-24 Location: yorkshire Summary: A sizeable contingent elected to sample the CHECC training sessions on Saturday, while others burned off their hangovers by caving in Vesper Pot. The crackedest chose King, and closely escaped its clutches. On Sunday,  
Type: trip 
Photoarchive: 
  Mainimg: .jpg 
  Thumbl: --thumb.jpg 
  Thumbr: --thumb.jpg 
  Authors: Rita Cookson, Tanguy Racine
  Cavepeeps: 
    DATE=2017-11-25; 
      CAVE=Vesper pot; 
      PEOPLE=Rhys Tyers, Ben Honan, Jennifer Ryder, Rebecca Diss, Arun Paul; 
   DATE=2017-11-25; 
       CAVE=King pot; 
       PEOPLE=Tanguy Racine, Alex Seaton, Jack Halliday; 
   DATE=2017-11-26; 
       CAVE=Alum Pot; 
       PEOPLE=Alex Seaton, Jack Halliday, Tanguy Racine, Peter Ganson, Rita Cookson, Rebecca Diss, Jennifer Ryder; 
  
       
   Status:

{{ mainimg }} {{ photolink }}

{{ allpeople }}

##Friday
The logistics of the CHECC weekend demanded that we find a cave to explore before dropping off the CHECC contigent at Dalesbridge in the small hours of Saturday morning: the plan was to agree on a suitable cave or caves in the minibus. Given the dire weather reports, and the extensive amount of rainfall in the week leading up to the weekend, as well as the expectations of the ACHECCers to do a reasonable trip ( I was certainly keen to push for a harder trip), we ended up formulating these plans. King Pot for Alex, Jack and I, and Vesper Pot for the rest of the cavers not tied up in a training session of some sort. 
####Tanguy 


Saturday
The following morning, after a short sleep, the three of us staying at the NPC cottage had a quick breakfast before packing the ropes for King pot, and soon after, leaving with the minibus to pick up the CHECCers, whose last message dated from 5am. I had no idea who would be up and willing to cave, but as we rocked up at Dalesbridge, we were greeted by mostly awake and keen people. The length of the queue to breakfast precluded any immediate start for Kingsdale, but it did provide us with some time to pack up the Vesper ropes on the car park. 

Finally ready to leave for the caves, we bid adieu to Peter, Rita, Jay et al., who were about to jump in DKP’s car. Arun, Rhys, Diss, Jennifer and Ben took their seats in the minibus and off we went, in the glorious sunshine. I was glad to see that snow still covered the heights and that the change would be pleasant. Anything to ease a mind before attempting King Pot. The dale was crowded however, with countless cars parked where we would have been; all seemed to go to West Kingsdale however, as we didn’t see anyone take the road to Braida Garth.

When the time came to stride across the valley, the weather turned for the worse and a light curtain of snow mingled with drizzle fell across our faces. This was gone by the time we’d reached the top of the steep climb, and we had slanting shafts of sunlight illuminating our way to the non-descript shakehole that is the entrance of King Pot. I was glad to find it almost at once, especially since I’d only  been in the cave once before, to learn rigging. The first broken free-climb down a narrow fissure gives away the nature of the cave almost at once. With all parts of the body pressed against the black rock, I slid gracefully and landed in the next chamber. 

The first bits of rigging went quick - a roped climb with a spacious floor level squeeze, and then the perfect pitch, a beautiful Y-hang dropping clean onto a boulder pile. There ended the niceties. I dived in the boulder crawl at the base of the pitch, and following the NFTFH description, found the awkward, high level rift traverse. I went too low and climbed back out at the far end, cursing my tackle sack and slightly out-of-breath. I advised Jack, who was following me at this point to stay high in the keyhole shaped passage and thrutch his way along. Red faced from the effort, he came out of the rift and sat next to me. I decided to rebalance the bags then, taking the middle ropes tacklesack, giving Jack the camera, and Alex, who by then had also joined us, the final ropes. 

We went across the pre-rigged traverse, and a little unsuspecting of what awaited beyond, I just went in the blasted crawl, with a tackle sack in front of me. While this was just about manageable for the first section, I soon found myself unable to progress. I backed out to a larger alcove, unclipped the bag, and went over it and through the cosy fit. That done, I came back for the bag and waited at the far end, where the sounds of Jack struggling with the back reached me. I saw him  unclip his helmet along the tightest section, but back out again. Taking the bag out, I gave some directions to pass the constrictions, which he managed to do helmet on.

We regrouped at the far end. Jack said that the squeezes were coming to a point where he was physically uncomfortable going through. I replied drawing out a plan for the day, adapted to our current progress, insisting that the tightest squeeze I remembered was the one we had just passed. We had some water, and I set about rigging the next pitch, which begins with a constriction. Before I disappeared off in the abyss, Jack again told us that he might have trouble going through this. I assured him it was going to be fine and went down. A few minutes later, he was down too and although he’d needed a bit of advice approaching the rebelay from the right position, I thought things were rather looking up. 

We refreshed ourselves in the damp crawl that followed, dragging our tacklesacks through merrily, and popped out in a spacious aven, where again we had a bit of water. This was the start of the T-shaped passage, and I simply declared that we should check that the tackle sacks and SRT bags are securely closed and attached to avoid dropping them in the rift. I led the way in, loosely followed by Jack, who once in a while paused to ask for advice on passing a specific bit. I waited at certain key points  - there is one place where a rock is wedged in the middle of the rift, and provides a welcome resting place, just before the final two doglegs and exit. Well, the final two doglegs are about as inconvenient as you can get: very little room to turn around and present oneself in the right orientation. The exit is even more so: a widening rift, some tatty rope for support, and a constriction where it is necessary to stay very high in the rift to go through, this requires a significant amount of core strength.

When Jack, again red faced and sweating came out of the rift to sit beside me at the start of the Queensway, he seriously asked whether the next bit of passage was worth the effort of the T-shaped. I assured him that it was, and looking at my watch, realised this was our last bit of exploration for the day anyway. Having carried the camera through the T-shape, I resolved to use it at some point (well-decorated passage cropped up in that paragraph of our description). However, since we were not bottoming King that day, I told Alex to leave the rope tackle sack midway through the rift. As it happens, he’d carried it almost all the way through. 

Onwards, onto some pleasant passage, with a bit of a stream and some short stals on the ceiling, until we found Lego Inlet, the Telephone Aven (where does it go?), and finally a short blockage that was close to lovely bit with deeper streamway. There were nice rock benches on the side, where we had chocolate and water and a photo session. Suitably rested, and now pressed for time, we turned around, and ambled back to the T-shape, hopping over the boulders. I got confused at Lego Inlet, and thinking we’d gone the wrong way, almost led everyone up the inlet. Alex and Jack were quick to point out my mistake, and we carried on. Jack then went up a boulder slope that wasn’t the way on, so I got one back over. 

We reached the T-shape again. Alex went ahead and picked up the bag, carrying it all the way through to the other side. He would become quite a bit of an expert at this. Jack then attempted the entry climb several times, but simply couldn’t support his bodyweight on the left arm and leg. Several time, he ended up upright in the final section of the rift, cowstails clipped to the loop of rope. Every time he had to climb back out and try again taxed him a bit more. After 40 mins of this, I went in myself, handing Alex another bag to carry through, and saw for myself what position would be easiest to go through the early obstacle. 

The truth is, there is no ‘easy’ option, and being quite fit, I sometimes find it hard to appreciate what is just doable by most people. Keen to make some progress, little as it was, because everything would become objectively easier after this obstacle, I went first in the rift, clipped in and found a place at low level, from which I would be able to provide support for Jack as he went ahead. Alex was just in front. This worked, and getting a little bit further towards our exit massively lifted my mood. Alex turned around with Jack in tow, to pass the two doglegs, while I climbed out again to grab the remaining tackle. By the time I arrived back at the first dogleg however I heard more sounds of struggle. 

I was getting serious flashbacks to the first time I went in King Pot. Jack had slipped a little way down the rift as he was trying to face the opposite way between the doglegs. A nodule wedged the small of his back, and he had little in the way of footholds. He stayed in that position a long time, shuffling sideways a little bit. Jack rescued himself admirably. He knew what he could and could not do, and asked for our advice, rebutting our help if he felt it would worsen his position. He swore, but then asked about things other than caving and stayed composed throughout. Finally, he found he could lift himself up into the high level of the rift, where he became unwedged. Alex gave him back his helmet, and he did a 180° turn to face the next dogleg. This was, by a matter of minutes, very, very close to calling a rescue.

We regrouped at the far end of the rift, into the high aven chamber. We had a chat about what had just happened and decided to make a steady way out. We ticked off the obstacles one by one, but Alex or Jack will know more about that, since I took the derigging duties, and mainly spent the time mulling over these events. At the blasted crawl, I struggled with two tacklesacks, but nothing came of it, and eventually, we emerged on the dark, desolate fell. This was the first time Jack came out of a cave after Sunset. I was going to miss my Slovenia talk at CHECC, but at the forefront of my thoughts was the fact that we had had a close escape from King, once again. 

I want to go back, to go further into King Pot, but the cave is objectively tough, unforgiving, reluctant to yield its secrets. Maybe this is what grips the imagination of the more experienced cavers out there.

We had a chat back at the NPC, until the early hours of Sunday, trying to get to the bottom of what happened. For one thing, I take pride in taking people in new, hard to get to places. I believe their achievements reflect on my leadership, but it certainly tells a whole lot more about me, as an enabler, rather than the actual achievers. Maybe it is better that newer members achieve other things with minimal help in easier caves, and can call it their own, and that calls for more humility as a leader. This is certain: the close escape made me ask serious questions about my caving/leadership style and will be having (hopefully) positive influences on how I cave henceforth.
####Tanguy

Sunday
Now onto lighter things. I drove back to Dalesbridge to check out on our ICCC representatives, who, in the grand scheme of things, did not let the club down. We had teams and individuals putting their body at risk to defend our colours. Pot and Sling, Squeeze Machine: we were there in the thick of it all. Our team made it to the quarter finals of the Beer Pong competition, before bowing the Southampton Juggernaut. The floor was slick underfoot, even the carpets were damp, and more than half of a sloe-gin bottle had been consumed (by a single person) before I left again, for the quiet NPC bunkroom. Before saying goodbye however, I tentatively approached those who would cave on the morrow, and we adopted Alum as our destination of choice. 

In the morning, Jack Alex and I packed ropes for Alum, and quickly got under way to have the cave rigged before midday, so that I could drive back to pick the CHECC contingent at Dalesbridge. The first part went to plan, and early enough I left Alex and Jack to rig their merry way down the Dolly Tubs route. I got out and nipped down SE route, tying in the traverse to the greasy slab bridge.

Out again before 12;00pm, I jumped into the van, still clad in my oversuit and headed off to the CHECC venue. This is where the plan came apart. The AGM was still a long way off being concluded as the CHECC grand prize winners hadn’t even been announced. I stayed quiet as long as I could, allured by the promise of showing my documentary to the audience. But fourth placed, alcoholic Southampton stole the show on this one. No longer containing my annoyance, I grabbed as many ICCC as would come to Alum; the tents were still up apparently - and I was reaching boiling point. 

Back out, the formidable blue sky had given in to grey, sad drizzle, but we had mission to find Alex and Jack again. An hour later than I would have liked, we strode off across the fell towards the clump of trees that fringe the open shaft of Alum. I convinced Peter to try out my spectacular SE descent, while the rest of us, Diss, Jay, Rita and Jennifer got to the Churns entrance.

Pressed for time as we were, we only got down the first pre-rigged pitch before turning around. Alex derigged SE route, while I took up the ropes from the Dolly Tubs. Jack, who was going out just in front told me of the economical rigging choices made on the trip, but assured me he still enjoyed the day out. I encouraged the group to explore the high level passages in long Churn to make up for the shorter trip. This had the unintended consequence that I found myself alone at the top of the first pitch, and in the absence of lights on the fell, started worrying that somehow the entire group was still inside Upper Long Churn. Somewhere. 

After a quick scan up and down the cave, it appeared everyone had left so I went back to the bus, where indeed, everyone was getting changed. We had also gained Rhys, whom Dave had dropped off not long ago and this made the next bit of the plan come together easily. 

We went first at Ingleton to refuel, then dropped the caving kits at the NPC, emptying the van completely. Rhys drove back to Dalesbridge to pick up Arun and Ben. In the meantime, Alex, Jack and I enjoyed the remains of a chicken curry and sorted out the hut. Quickly afterwards, the group came back, loaded the van and had a cup of tea. We left at 6pm, but still had to drop off extra rubbish at Ingleton on the way, which made for a 0.30am arrival in London. Not too bad, but I won’t be doing one of those trips in a hurry!
####Tanguy
